our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/index.md, before:

---
layout: resource-topic-index
title: User Needs
subtitle: How to focus government services on users
nav-breadcrumbs:
  - "Digital Front Door": "/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/"
---

People come to government websites with specific needs. Anything that gets between your users and meeting those needs should be removed. Use these guides to find out how to provide the right content and the right services to your users. 

## [What should a city website do?](/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/what-should-a-city-website-do.html)
Use this guide to learn about general principles for city websites, how to start publishing effective web content, and how to prioritize transactional needs on your site.

## [Where do I start?](/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/where-do-i-start.html)
Use this guide if you are looking for advice on how to plan a new city website alpha, a redesign or overhaul and good tasks to start with.

## [Run a resident survey](/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/run-a-resident-survey.html)
If you are starting a website redesign, use this survey to assess the devices and types of internet access used in different parts of your city, evaluate user needs to prioritize content development, and understand where your city has strong and weak connections to users of its website.

Commit message:

work-in-progress on what-should-city-website-do vs what are goals of a good city website

our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/index.md, after:

---
layout: resource-topic-index
title: User Needs
subtitle: How to focus government services on users
nav-breadcrumbs:
  - "Digital Front Door": "/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/"
---

People come to city websites with specific needs. Anything that gets between your users and meeting those needs should be removed. Use these guides to find out how to provide the right content and the right services to your users. 

## [What are the goals of a good city website?](/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/goals-good-city-website.html)
Use this guide to learn about what goals a city website should have for government and residents and general principles. 

## [What should a city website do?](/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/what-should-a-city-website-do.html)
Use this guide to learn general principles about how a city website should work for its users. 

## [Where do I start?](/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/where-do-i-start.html)
Use this guide if you are looking for advice on how to plan a new city website alpha, a redesign or overhaul and good tasks to start with.

## [Run a resident survey](/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/run-a-resident-survey.html)
If you are starting a website redesign, use this survey to assess the devices and types of internet access used in different parts of your city, evaluate user needs to prioritize content development, and understand where your city has strong and weak connections to users of its website.
