our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/where-do-i-start.md, before:

---
layout: resource-detailed-guidance
title: Where do I start?
subtitle: Starting an iterative, user-centered practice around your city website
nav-breadcrumbs:
  - "Digital Front Door": "/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/"
  - "User Needs": "/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/"
---

This guide is to help leadership responsible for redesigning, re-implementing or overhauling a city website put in place the practices that will lead to delivering radically better digital services.  

## A new way of delivering government services

### Putting users first

Building a good city website means meeting the needs of your users. Your users will have high expectations of digital services, whether delivered by government or private companies. We have a responsibility to meet those expectations. 

This guide is written to help you learn from the teams who are building successful, world-class digital services. You will learn how to place users at the heart of the services you deliver, incorporating their feedback at every step of the way. 

### Iterating with user research

Government services are normally built after long and expensive procurement processes, and users are rarely consulted about the service they'll be using. The first time real users might see a service is when it is made live, by which time it is normally practically too late - and too expensive - to make any changes if the service turns out to be unfit for purpose. 

This way of working and procuring services normally leads to an extremely detailed requirements document or RFP in an attempt to reduce risk. Instead, teams must constantly iterate against user feedback by building, testing and delivering in small, regular pieces, working quickly to deliver improvements.

This approach allows teams the flexibility to work out the best way to meet user needs, to release code regularly and to work in an iterative way. It also makes it much easier for policy and delivery teams to work together.

## Your next steps

We recommend that you start with a discovery phase. This should take no longer than 4 to 8 weeks. 

### The Team

Your starting team should be made up of your stakeholders and any core members that you've identified, including the person responsible for the quality and usage of your city's website. A good set of core team members would include:

 - a delivery manager
 - one or more designers
 - one or more user researchers
 - one or more developers
 - one or more content designers
 - the support of a technical architect
 - the support of some web operations expertise

### Outputs

Your discovery phase should produce:

 - a prioritized list of user needs
 - a prioritized list of story cards to feed into project teams
 - understanding of team and capability required to complete the project
 - ability to scope and plan an alpha
 - a decision to progress to next phase
 - maybe some rough prototypes
 - maybe some user personas
 - a list of stakeholders and input from them about existing services
 - understanding of existing services, including those run by non-government sources
 - understanding of how many of your users will need assisted digital support, and what their user needs are

### After the discovery phase

Once you have completed the discovery phase, you'll be ready to move on to the alpha phase, where the team will build a prototype, test it with users and improve it.

Commit message:

started skeleton what-should-site-do vs what-should-site-be
udpate where-do-i-start with cyd feedback

our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/where-do-i-start.md, after:

---
layout: resource-detailed-guidance
title: Where do I start?
subtitle: Starting an iterative, user-centered practice around your city website
nav-breadcrumbs:
  - "Digital Front Door": "/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/"
  - "User Needs": "/our-work/initiatives/digitalfrontdoor/playbook/user-needs/"
---

This guide is to help leadership responsible for redesigning, re-implementing or overhauling a city website put in place the practices that will lead to delivering radically better digital services.  

## A new way of delivering government services

### Putting users first

Building a good city website means meeting the needs of your users. Your users will have high expectations of digital services, whether delivered by government or private companies. We have a responsibility to meet those expectations. 

This guide is written to help you learn from the teams who are building successful, world-class digital services. You will learn how to place users at the heart of the services you deliver, incorporating their feedback at every step of the way. 

### Iterating with user research

Government services are normally built after long and expensive procurement processes, and users are rarely consulted about the service they'll be using. The first time real users might see a service is when it is made live, by which time it is normally practically too late - and too expensive - to make any changes if the service turns out to be unfit for purpose. 

This way of working and procuring services normally leads to an extremely detailed requirements document or RFP in an attempt to reduce risk. Instead, teams must constantly iterate against user feedback by building, testing and delivering in small, regular pieces, working quickly to deliver improvements.

This approach allows teams the flexibility to work out the best way to meet user needs, to release code regularly and to work in an iterative way. It also makes it much easier for policy and delivery teams to work together.

## Your next steps

We recommend that you start with a discovery phase. This should take no longer than 4 to 8 weeks. 

### The discovery team

Your starting team should be made up of your stakeholders and any core members that you've identified, including the person responsible for the quality and usage of your city's website. A good set of core team members would include:

 - someone to lead the overall project, for example, a communications director
 - one or more people to be responsible for outreach and to run a user survey, or to work with a company that can run a survey for you

### Outputs

Your discovery phase should produce:

 - a prioritized list of user needs
 - ability to decide what should in your alpha website and your plan for delivering it 
 - a decision on whether or not to progress to the alpha website stage
 - some rough sketches of an alpha website
 - a list of stakeholders and input from them about what the existing website does, whether by government or third parties 
 - a review of your website analytics (website traffic) to understand how many and pages and documents you have, and how frequently they are used
 - the results of your [digital service census](https://service-census.herokuapp.com)

### After the discovery phase

Once you have completed the discovery phase, you'll be ready to move on to the alpha phase, where the team will build a prototype, test it with users and improve it.
