governments/principles/government-technology/index.md, before:

---
layout: principles-standard
title: Principles for Government Technology
status: beta
last-updated: April 13, 2015
masthead-image: "../../media/images/cities_fellowship_faq/citiesfaqheader.jpg"
nav_tier1_active: "governments"
nav-breadcrumbs:
 - Governments: "/cities"
 - Principles for 21st Century Government: "/governments/principles/"
---

            
One of our [principles for 21st Century Government](/governments/principles/ "Principles for 21st Century Government") is [use the right technology for the job](/governments/principles/#procurement "Use the right technology for the job"). This principle sits where government and vendors meet. 

Government technology is at an important point: the number and quality of vendors is increasing, and government interest in digital technology that works is rising. There is an unmet opportunity to move the market towards government technology that works in the 21st century. 

And while government purchasing is highly regulated to deliver accountability, value for money, fairness, security and transparency, it’s clear that these aims are not always met. Sometimes, technology is delivered that is not fit for purpose.

Listed below are seven principles that promote good digital products and practices in government technology. We’ve based these principles on how successful governments, vendors and products work together to deliver 21st Century Government. 
    
### 1. Design for and with people

“Big IT” is what government is used to: expensive — up to hundreds-of-millions-of-dollars — slow to deliver and often unfit for purpose. When software and hardware is cheaper everywhere, government technology cannot be the exception. Government technology should deliver a significant improvement in pricing and value over legacy “Big IT.” These products, with successful practices, are deployed in weeks, not years. 

As well as price, massive  improvements in value can be delivered by:

*   vendors and governments using different business models
*   discovering new economies of scale and
*   delivery of services via the cloud. 

### 2. Deliver a significant improvement in pricing and value over “Big IT”

Big IT is what government is used to. Expensive — in the hundreds-of-millions-of-dollars range — slow to deliver and often unfit for purpose. When software and hardware is cheaper everywhere, government technology cannot be the exception. New Govtech products should deliver an immense  100x improvement in pricing and value over legacy “Big IT.”

As well as price, massive improvements in value can be delivered through:

*	vendors and governments using different business models;
*	discovering new economies of scale; and 
*	the use of cloud or virtualized technology.

### 3. Enable data-driven government

Governments should monitor their services in real-time for speed, availability and effectiveness in achieving policy. Government technology should deliver relevant, actionable information using open standards so that staff can evaluate the effectiveness of policies, tools and processes to better and more quickly serve their users.

### 4. Use and promote open standards

Open makes things better by making it easier to understand and examine services, and by making it easier to improve them together. Government technology should reject proprietary file formats and closed standards and instead use and promote open standards to deliver a collaborative digital platform for government. 

Governments can help prevent being locked in to a particular product by requiring open standards. This can help make it easier to export usable data into another product. 

### 5. Contract quickly, clearly, and transparently 

Doing business should be easy, not hard. A long sales or purchase cycle is a sign of an inefficient system. Governments and vendors both benefit when they are transparent about how long decisions will take. 

Purchasing decisions should be made based on their value-proposition - not just their final dollar amount. While there are many kinds of projects with varying degrees of complexity (for example, from low-risk to high-risk and inexpensive to expensive) in general, contracts below the procurement threshold should be signed in no longer than:

*   30-60 days for state and local government* 
*   45-120 days for the federal government.*

Vendors should also consider the benefits of being on the [GSA Schedule] (http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/197989 "GSA Schedule") for working with the Federal Government. 

Requests for proposal (RFPs) must be written clearly and transparently, and must outline the problem to be solved, rather than the solution to be bought or procured. This gives vendors space for creativity and new ways to respond to the RFP. Also, subject matter experts (SMEs) and other stakeholders should be involved in the creation of the RFP as well as the selection and implementation process. Finally, consider whether the RFPs should be written to allow startups or small businesses to apply as well as established or incumbent vendors.

Government technology should be easy to sell and easy to buy. Contracts should:

*	be written clearly and transparently, in easy to understand language;
*   include predictable pricing;
*	include maintenance responsibilities;
*	include indemnity clauses to limit losses for both parties;
*	include a process to cover any changes;
*	include effective escape or termination options for both parties;
*	explain happens when the contract ends or terminates;
*	include a process to settle differences;
*   explicitly cover data ownership. These terms could be covered in the government’s Open Data Policy;
*	include flexible intellectual property (IP) terms. For example, governments and vendors should consider licensing technology as another option alongside purchasing. Government and vendors should also consider a range of options for IP including open source licences. 

&#42; Based on interviews with govtech entrepreneurs  and governments. 

### 6. Deliver continuous improvement

Government technology should continuously improve. Improvement through regular, small iteration reduces risk, makes big failures less likely and turns small failures into lessons. 

By using services that continuously improve, government services can gain ongoing improvements for free, without having to do any heavy lifting or much effort.

### 7. Don’t re-invent the wheel

Government should do only what government can do. Government technology should be built using existing technology, when appropriate. This allows savings of funding, time, and resources. 

Vendors of government technology shouldn't re-invent products or systems. Often parts of a product can be implemented from external sources or partners. For example, given that support resources need to be reliable and support expansion; partnering with a cloud hosting provide may be the most effective option rather than building a private cloud.

Commit message:

Correct text for "Design for and with people"
Another principles' text was listed for #1. Now it has the correct text.

governments/principles/government-technology/index.md, after:

---
layout: principles-standard
title: Principles for Government Technology
status: beta
last-updated: April 13, 2015
masthead-image: "../../media/images/cities_fellowship_faq/citiesfaqheader.jpg"
nav_tier1_active: "governments"
nav-breadcrumbs:
 - Governments: "/cities"
 - Principles for 21st Century Government: "/governments/principles/"
---

            
One of our [principles for 21st Century Government](/governments/principles/ "Principles for 21st Century Government") is [use the right technology for the job](/governments/principles/#procurement "Use the right technology for the job"). This principle sits where government and vendors meet. 

Government technology is at an important point: the number and quality of vendors is increasing, and government interest in digital technology that works is rising. There is an unmet opportunity to move the market towards government technology that works in the 21st century. 

And while government purchasing is highly regulated to deliver accountability, value for money, fairness, security and transparency, it’s clear that these aims are not always met. Sometimes, technology is delivered that is not fit for purpose.

Listed below are seven principles that promote good digital products and practices in government technology. We’ve based these principles on how successful governments, vendors and products work together to deliver 21st Century Government. 
    
### 1. Design for and with people

New Govtech products are focused on understanding and delivering against user needs - whether government employees or residents. These products deliver for interfaces that respect people's time, dignity, and abilities. They are so simple and easy to use that a user is able to succeed the first time, unassisted. 

### 2. Deliver a significant improvement in pricing and value over “Big IT”

Big IT is what government is used to. Expensive — in the hundreds-of-millions-of-dollars range — slow to deliver and often unfit for purpose. When software and hardware is cheaper everywhere, government technology cannot be the exception. New Govtech products should deliver an immense 100x improvement in pricing and value over legacy “Big IT.”

As well as price, massive improvements in value can be delivered through:

*	vendors and governments using different business models;
*	discovering new economies of scale; and 
*	the use of cloud or virtualized technology.

### 3. Enable data-driven government

Governments should monitor their services in real-time for speed, availability and effectiveness in achieving policy. Government technology should deliver relevant, actionable information using open standards so that staff can evaluate the effectiveness of policies, tools and processes to better and more quickly serve their users.

### 4. Use and promote open standards

Open makes things better by making it easier to understand and examine services, and by making it easier to improve them together. Government technology should reject proprietary file formats and closed standards and instead use and promote open standards to deliver a collaborative digital platform for government. 

Governments can help prevent being locked in to a particular product by requiring open standards. This can help make it easier to export usable data into another product. 

### 5. Contract quickly, clearly, and transparently 

Doing business should be easy, not hard. A long sales or purchase cycle is a sign of an inefficient system. Governments and vendors both benefit when they are transparent about how long decisions will take. 

Purchasing decisions should be made based on their value-proposition - not just their final dollar amount. While there are many kinds of projects with varying degrees of complexity (for example, from low-risk to high-risk and inexpensive to expensive) in general, contracts below the procurement threshold should be signed in no longer than:

*   30-60 days for state and local government* 
*   45-120 days for the federal government.*

Vendors should also consider the benefits of being on the [GSA Schedule] (http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/197989 "GSA Schedule") for working with the Federal Government. 

Requests for proposal (RFPs) must be written clearly and transparently, and must outline the problem to be solved, rather than the solution to be bought or procured. This gives vendors space for creativity and new ways to respond to the RFP. Also, subject matter experts (SMEs) and other stakeholders should be involved in the creation of the RFP as well as the selection and implementation process. Finally, consider whether the RFPs should be written to allow startups or small businesses to apply as well as established or incumbent vendors.

Government technology should be easy to sell and easy to buy. Contracts should:

*	be written clearly and transparently, in easy to understand language;
*   include predictable pricing;
*	include maintenance responsibilities;
*	include indemnity clauses to limit losses for both parties;
*	include a process to cover any changes;
*	include effective escape or termination options for both parties;
*	explain happens when the contract ends or terminates;
*	include a process to settle differences;
*   explicitly cover data ownership. These terms could be covered in the government’s Open Data Policy;
*	include flexible intellectual property (IP) terms. For example, governments and vendors should consider licensing technology as another option alongside purchasing. Government and vendors should also consider a range of options for IP including open source licences. 

&#42; Based on interviews with govtech entrepreneurs  and governments. 

### 6. Deliver continuous improvement

Government technology should continuously improve. Improvement through regular, small iteration reduces risk, makes big failures less likely and turns small failures into lessons. 

By using services that continuously improve, government services can gain ongoing improvements for free, without having to do any heavy lifting or much effort.

### 7. Don’t re-invent the wheel

Government should do only what government can do. Government technology should be built using existing technology, when appropriate. This allows savings of funding, time, and resources. 

Vendors of government technology shouldn't re-invent products or systems. Often parts of a product can be implemented from external sources or partners. For example, given that support resources need to be reliable and support expansion; partnering with a cloud hosting provide may be the most effective option rather than building a private cloud.
