playbooks/technology-procurement/index.md, before:

---
layout: resource
resource_index: true
title: Government technology procurement
subtitle: Getting from buying technology to delivering services that work
nav-breadcrumbs:
  - "Government technology procurement": "/playbook/technology-procurement/"
---

Over the last few years in our work with local and state governments we have seen several high-profile failures in government technology - from new technology being over budget, late, or broken, or existing services with severe problems. These failures have drawn more and more attention to the way that government buys and delivers the technology needed to govern to its residents, staff and citizens. 

This _Government technology procurement_ playbook has been produced in the context of our wider work - the people, practices and products needed to deliver [21st century government](/governments/principles/) - to help governments in America improve the way they buy and use technology to deliver services that work.

This playbook has been split up into four parts: a background guide, general best practices, recommendations for RFPs and structural recommendations for government leadership. 

## [1. A background to government technology procurement](/playbooks/technology-procurement/background/)

This background guide explains how technology is typically treated and bought in government.

## [2. Best practices in government technology procurement](/playbooks/technology-procurement/best-practices/)

This guide is an overview of the best practices that governments around the world are using to deliver digital services that work. 

## [3. Recommendations for technology RFPs](/playbooks/technology-procurement/rfp-recommendations/)

In this guide, we list

* five ways in which technology RFPs can usually be improved; and 
* xx specific recommendations that could be applied to a typical technology RFP

## [4. Structural recommendations for government technology](/playbooks/technology-procurement/structural-recommendations/)

In this guide, we cover structural recommendations that government leadership - at department, agency, county, city or state level - should carry out to deliver digital services that work.

Commit message:

more wip for tech procurement playbook
added wardley maps for contract types
more writing/drafting
still not finished

playbooks/technology-procurement/index.md, after:

---
layout: resource
resource_index: true
title: Government technology procurement
subtitle: From buying technology to delivering services that work
nav-breadcrumbs:
  - "Government technology procurement": "/playbook/technology-procurement/"
---

Over the last few years in our work with local and state governments we have seen several high-profile failures in government technology - from new technology being over budget, late, or broken, or existing services with severe problems. These failures have drawn more and more attention to the way that government buys and delivers the technology needed to govern to its residents, staff and citizens. 

This _Government technology procurement_ playbook has been produced in the context of our wider work - the people, practices and products needed to deliver [21st century government](/governments/principles/) - to help governments in America improve the way they buy and use technology to deliver services that work.

This playbook has been split up into four parts: a background guide, general best practices, recommendations for RFPs and structural recommendations for government leadership. 

## [An introduction to government technology procurement](/playbooks/technology-procurement/background/)

How governments typically treat and buy technology.

## [Best practices in government technology procurement](/playbooks/technology-procurement/best-practices/)

This guide is an overview of the best practices that governments around the world are using to deliver digital services that work. 

## [Writing better technology RFPs](/playbooks/technology-procurement/rfp-recommendations/)

In this guide, we list

* five ways in which technology RFPs can usually be improved; and 
* xx specific recommendations that could be applied to a typical technology RFP

## [Structural recommendations for government technology](/playbooks/technology-procurement/structural-recommendations/)

In this guide, we cover structural recommendations that government leadership - at department, agency, county, city or state level - should carry out to deliver digital services that work.
